
# Practical exercises

Exercises are an essential part of many teaching situations. Here, four
different approaches will be explained briefly. They apply to exercises
carried out in a 'dry' environment: computer classes, calculations,
working with data etc.

### Recipe: Step-by-step instruction

Take trainees by the hand and bring them home safely.

Write down every single step to complete the task to be done in the
exercise down and make this instruction available to the trainees.
During the tutorial, you will simultaneously read the instructions, and
demonstrate the according actions so that trainees can see them on a
screen and follow them.

This needs to be done slowly because trainees need to try several times
anyway. It is a little like reading a ‘bedtime story’.

This approach has the advantage of being very tolerant if the trainees
have little experience with the subject, or the subject turns out to be
difficult. The trainer can take them by the hand and guide them to a
successful completion of the tutorial. On the downside it needs to be
said that the trainees don’t need to think very much during the
tutorial. But especially if you don’t know what situation you are going
to face, this may be a very good choice.


### Recipe: Atomize exercises

**Chop up your content into tiny pieces.**

Create many small exercises instead of a big one. This allows students
to be successful even if they are not able to solve every single one of
them.

To connect the individual tasks, you can have each result into a letter
or code that together will form a whole.

Ideally, the exercise fully allows for self-checking.


Example: see Linux tutorial + image



### Recipe: Knowledge transfer

Show a sample solution for a related problem first.

When reading a language coursebook, you will find at the beginning of
each chapter a short text that contains examples of all topics treated
in that chapter. Lessons usually start with reading this text, and then
elaborating different aspects of this topic (grammar, vocabulary,
content etc.).

You can borrow this idea, and apply it to teaching other subjects, too.
First, you show a sample solution, and let the trainees repeat and
understand it. Then, you give a task where trainees have to modify the
approach a little to apply it to a different problem. Provide some
reference material (data, facts, formulae, computer commands etc) that
trainees can work with independently.

What is very nice about this method is that you can fit complicated
subjects into a shorter time box, because the trainees dont have to
start from zero.


### Recipe: Use hint cards/web information

Build a fail-safe system into tutorials or other complex tasks.

Create an incremental set of hints that guide students through an
exercise. The hints can be on paper cards or on a wiki webpage. The
hints do not replace giving a theoretical background or providing an
overview of the topic. They rather help trainees regulate their learning
speed autonomously, thereby taking the burden of the trainer to
intervene when small problems occur or getting interrupted.

This method is described in more detail in:

Rother K, Musielak M, Pleus A, Upmeier zu Belzen A, Multi-Stage Learning
Aids applied to hands-on software training. Brief Bioinform 2010; doi:
10.1093/bib/bbq024.
